docs/topics/stores/blob.md, before:

# 🗂️ Blob Server

## Index

- [1. Description](#1-description)
- [2. Architecture](#2-architecture)
- [3. Technology](#3-technology)
    - [3.1 Overview](#31-overview)
    - [3.2 Store Options](#32-store-options)
    - [3.3 Concurrent Access Patterns](#33-concurrent-access-patterns)
    - [3.4 HTTP REST API Server](#34-http-rest-api-server)
- [4. Data Model](#4-data-model)
- [5. Use Cases](#5-use-cases)
    - [5.1. Asset Server (HTTP): Get Transactions](#51-asset-server-http-get-transactions)
    - [5.2. Asset Server (HTTP): Get Subtrees](#52-asset-server-http-get-subtrees)
    - [5.3. Block Assembly](#53-block-assembly)
    - [5.4. Block Validation](#54-block-validation)
    - [5.5 Propagation: TXStore Set()](#55-propagation-txstore-set)
- [6. Directory Structure and Main Files](#6-directory-structure-and-main-files)
- [7. Locally Running the store](#7-locally-running-the-store)
- [8. Configuration Options](#8-configuration-options)
- [9. Other Resources](#9-other-resources)

## 1. Description

The Blob Store is a generic datastore that can be used for any specific data model. In the current Teranode implementation, it is used to store transactions (extended tx) and subtrees.

The Blob Store provides a set of methods to interact with the TX and Subtree storage implementations:

### Store Interface Methods

- **Health**: `Health(ctx, checkLiveness bool) (int, string, error)` - Checks the health status of the blob store, returning HTTP status code, description, and any error.

- **Exists**: `Exists(ctx, key, fileType, opts...) (bool, error)` - Determines if a given key exists in the store.

- **Get**: `Get(ctx, key, fileType, opts...) ([]byte, error)` - Retrieves the blob data associated with a given key.

- **GetIoReader**: `GetIoReader(ctx, key, fileType, opts...) (io.ReadCloser, error)` - Retrieves an `io.ReadCloser` for the blob associated with a given key, useful for streaming large data.

- **Set**: `Set(ctx, key, fileType, value, opts...) error` - Stores a key-value pair in the store.

- **SetFromReader**: `SetFromReader(ctx, key, fileType, reader, opts...) error` - Stores a key-value pair in the store from an `io.ReadCloser`, useful for streaming large data.

- **SetDAH**: `SetDAH(ctx, key, fileType, dah, opts...) error` - Sets a Delete-At-Height value for a given key for automatic blockchain-based expiration.

- **GetDAH**: `GetDAH(ctx, key, fileType, opts...) (uint32, error)` - Retrieves the Delete-At-Height value for a given key.

- **Del**: `Del(ctx, key, fileType, opts...) error` - Deletes a key and its associated value from the store.

- **Close**: `Close(ctx) error` - Closes the Blob Store connection and releases any associated resources.

- **SetCurrentBlockHeight**: `SetCurrentBlockHeight(height uint32)` - Sets the current block height for the store, used for DAH functionality.

## 2. Architecture

The Blob Store is a store interface, with implementations for Tx Store and Subtree Store.

![Blob_Store_Component_Context_Diagram.png](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2FBlob_Store_Component_Context_Diagram.png)

The Blob Store implementations for Tx Store and Subtree Store are injected into the various services that require them. They are initialized in `daemon/daemon_stores.go` and passed into the services as dependencies. See example below:

```go
// GetTxStore returns the main transaction store instance. If the store hasn't been initialized yet,
// it creates a new one using the configured URL from settings.
func (d *Stores) GetTxStore(logger ulogger.Logger, appSettings *settings.Settings) (blob.Store, error) {
    if d.mainTxStore != nil {
        return d.mainTxStore, nil
    }

    txStoreURL := appSettings.Block.TxStore
    if txStoreURL == nil {
        return nil, errors.NewConfigurationError("txstore config not found")
    }

    var err error
    hashPrefix := 2
    if txStoreURL.Query().Get("hashPrefix") != "" {
        hashPrefix, err = strconv.Atoi(txStoreURL.Query().Get("hashPrefix"))
        if err != nil {
            return nil, errors.NewConfigurationError("txstore hashPrefix config error", err)
        }
    }

    d.mainTxStore, err = blob.NewStore(logger, txStoreURL, options.WithHashPrefix(hashPrefix))
    if err != nil {
        return nil, errors.NewServiceError("could not create tx store", err)
    }

    return d.mainTxStore, nil
}

// GetSubtreeStore returns the main subtree store instance. If the store hasn't been initialized yet,
// it creates a new one using the URL from settings.
func (d *Stores) GetSubtreeStore(ctx context.Context, logger ulogger.Logger, appSettings *settings.Settings) (blob.Store, error) {
    if d.mainSubtreeStore != nil {
        return d.mainSubtreeStore, nil
    }

    var err error
    subtreeStoreURL := appSettings.SubtreeValidation.SubtreeStore

    if subtreeStoreURL == nil {
        return nil, errors.NewConfigurationError("subtreestore config not found")
    }

    hashPrefix := 2
    if subtreeStoreURL.Query().Get("hashPrefix") != "" {
        hashPrefix, err = strconv.Atoi(subtreeStoreURL.Query().Get("hashPrefix"))
        if err != nil {
            return nil, errors.NewConfigurationError("subtreestore hashPrefix config error", err)
        }
    }

    blockchainClient, err := d.GetBlockchainClient(ctx, logger, appSettings, "subtree")
    if err != nil {
        return nil, errors.NewServiceError("could not create blockchain client for subtree store", err)
    }

    ch, err := getBlockHeightTrackerCh(ctx, logger, blockchainClient)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, errors.NewServiceError("could not create block height tracker channel", err)
    }

    d.mainSubtreeStore, err = blob.NewStore(logger, subtreeStoreURL,
        options.WithHashPrefix(hashPrefix),
        options.WithBlockHeightCh(ch))
    if err != nil {
        return nil, errors.NewServiceError("could not create subtree store", err)
    }

    return d.mainSubtreeStore, nil
}
```

The following diagram provides a deeper level of detail into the Blob Store's internal components and their interactions:

![blob_store_detailed_component.svg](../services/img/plantuml/blobserver/blob_store_detailed_component.svg)

## 3. Technology

### 3.1 Overview

Key technologies involved:

1. **Go Programming Language (Golang)**:

    - A statically typed, compiled language known for its simplicity and efficiency, especially in concurrent operations and networked services.
    - The primary language used for implementing the service's logic.

### 3.2 Store Options

The Blob Server supports various backends, each suited to different storage requirements and environments.

- **Batcher**: Provides batch processing capabilities for storage operations.

- **File**: Utilizes the local file system for storage.

- **HTTP**: Implements an HTTP client for interacting with a remote blob storage server.

- **Local DAH**: Provides local Delete-At-Height (DAH) functionality for managing blockchain-based data expiration.

- **Memory**: In-memory storage for temporary and fast data access.

- **Null**: A no-operation store for testing or disabling storage features.

- **Amazon S3**: Integration with Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) for cloud storage. [Amazon S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/)

Each store option is implemented in its respective subdirectory within the `stores/blob/` directory.

The system also includes a main server implementation (`server.go`) that provides an HTTP interface for blob storage operations.

Options for configuring these stores are managed through the `options` package.

### 3.3 Concurrent Access Patterns

The Blob Server includes a `ConcurrentBlob` implementation that provides thread-safe access to blob storage operations with optimized concurrent access patterns. This feature is particularly important in high-concurrency environments where the same blob might be requested multiple times simultaneously.

#### Key Features

- **Double-Checked Locking Pattern**: Ensures that only one fetch operation occurs at a time for each unique key, while allowing concurrent operations on different keys
- **Generic Type Support**: Parametrized by a key type K that must satisfy `chainhash.Hash` constraints for type-safe handling
- **Duplicate Operation Prevention**: Avoids duplicate network or disk operations when multiple goroutines request the same blob simultaneously
- **Efficient Resource Usage**: Other goroutines wait for completion rather than duplicating work

#### Usage Pattern

```go
// Create a concurrent blob instance
concurrentBlob := blob.NewConcurrentBlob[chainhash.Hash](blobStore, options...)

// Get a blob with automatic fetching if not present
reader, err := concurrentBlob.Get(ctx, key, fileType, func() (io.ReadCloser, error) {
    // This function is called only if the blob doesn't exist
    return fetchBlobFromSource(key)
})
```

The `ConcurrentBlob` wrapper is particularly useful for services that need to fetch the same data concurrently, such as block validation or transaction processing services.

### 3.4 HTTP REST API Server

The Blob Store includes a comprehensive HTTP REST API server implementation (`HTTPBlobServer`) that provides full HTTP access to blob storage operations. This server implements the standard `http.Handler` interface and can be easily integrated into existing HTTP server infrastructure.

#### Supported HTTP Endpoints

- **GET /health**: Health check endpoint returning server status
- **HEAD /blob/{key}.{fileType}**: Check if a blob exists without retrieving content
- **GET /blob/{key}.{fileType}**: Retrieve blob by key with optional Range header support for partial content
- **POST /blob/{key}.{fileType}**: Store new blob data with streaming support
- **PATCH /blob/{key}.{fileType}**: Update blob's Delete-At-Height value via `dah` query parameter
- **DELETE /blob/{key}.{fileType}**: Delete blob by key

#### Usage Example

```go
// Create HTTP blob server
httpServer := blob.NewHTTPBlobServer(blobStore, logger)

// Start HTTP server
http.Handle("/blob/", http.StripPrefix("/blob", httpServer))
log.Fatal(http.ListenAndServe(":8080", nil))
```

The HTTP server is particularly useful for external integrations, debugging, and providing web-based access to blob storage functionality.

## 4. Data Model

- [Subtree Data Model](../datamodel/subtree_data_model.md): Contain lists of transaction IDs and their Merkle root.

- [Extended Transaction Data Model](../datamodel/transaction_data_model.md): Include additional metadata to facilitate processing.

## 5. Use Cases

### 5.1. Asset Server (HTTP): Get Transactions

![asset_server_http_get_transaction.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fassetserver%2Fasset_server_http_get_transaction.svg)

### 5.2. Asset Server (HTTP): Get Subtrees

![asset_server_http_get_subtree.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fassetserver%2Fasset_server_http_get_subtree.svg)

### 5.3. Block Assembly

New Subtree and block mining scenarios:

![blob_server_block_assembly.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fblobserver%2Fblob_server_block_assembly.svg)

Reorganizing subtrees:

![asset_server_grpc_get_subtree.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fassetserver%2Fasset_server_grpc_get_subtree.svg)

### 5.4. Block Validation

Service:

![blob_server_block_validation.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fblobserver%2Fblob_server_block_validation.svg)

gRPC endpoints:

![blob_server_block_validation_addendum.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fblobserver%2Fblob_server_block_validation_addendum.svg)

### 5.5 Propagation: TXStore Set()

![txStore_propagation_set.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fassetserver%2FtxStore_propagation_set.svg)

## 6. Directory Structure and Main Files

```text
./stores/blob/
├── Interface.go                # Interface definitions for the blob store.
├── batcher                     # Batching functionality for efficient processing.
│   └── batcher.go              # Main batcher functionality.
├── concurrent_blob.go          # Concurrent blob access implementation.
├── concurrent_blob_test.go     # Test cases for concurrent blob access.
├── factory.go                  # Factory methods for creating store instances.
├── file                        # File system based implementations.
│   ├── file.go                 # File system handling.
│   └── file_test.go            # Test cases for file system functions.
├── http                        # HTTP client implementation for remote blob storage.
│   └── http.go                 # HTTP specific functionality.
├── localdah                    # Local Delete-At-Height functionality.
│   ├── localDAH.go             # Local DAH implementation.
│   └── localDAH_test.go        # Test cases for local DAH.
├── logger                      # Logging wrapper for blob store operations.
├── memory                      # In-memory implementation.
│   └── memory.go               # In-memory data handling.
├── mock.go                     # Mock implementation for testing.
├── null                        # Null implementation (no-op).
│   └── null.go                 # Null pattern implementation.
├── options                     # Options and configurations.
│   ├── Options.go              # General options for the project.
│   └── Options_test.go         # Test cases for options.
├── s3                          # Amazon S3 cloud storage implementation.
│   └── s3.go                   # S3 specific functionality.
├── server.go                   # HTTP server implementation for blob storage.
└── server_test.go              # Test cases for the server implementation.
```

## 7. Locally Running the store

The Blob Store cannot be run independently. It is instantiated as part of the main.go initialization and directly used by the services that require it.

## 8. Configuration Options

For comprehensive configuration documentation including all settings, defaults, and interactions, see the [ublob Store Settings Reference](../../references/settings/stores/blob_settings.md).

## 9. Other Resources

[Blob Server Reference](../../references/stores/blob_reference.md)

Commit message:

docs: update blob store and seeder documentation (#340)

docs/topics/stores/blob.md, after:

# 🗂️ Blob Server

## Index

- [1. Description](#1-description)
- [2. Architecture](#2-architecture)
- [3. Technology](#3-technology)
    - [3.1 Overview](#31-overview)
    - [3.2 Store Options](#32-store-options)
    - [3.3 Concurrent Access Patterns](#33-concurrent-access-patterns)
    - [3.4 HTTP REST API Server](#34-http-rest-api-server)
- [4. Data Model](#4-data-model)
- [5. Use Cases](#5-use-cases)
    - [5.1. Asset Server (HTTP): Get Transactions](#51-asset-server-http-get-transactions)
    - [5.2. Asset Server (HTTP): Get Subtrees](#52-asset-server-http-get-subtrees)
    - [5.3. Block Assembly](#53-block-assembly)
    - [5.4. Block Validation](#54-block-validation)
    - [5.5 Propagation: TXStore Set()](#55-propagation-txstore-set)
- [6. Directory Structure and Main Files](#6-directory-structure-and-main-files)
- [7. Locally Running the store](#7-locally-running-the-store)
- [8. Configuration Options](#8-configuration-options)
- [9. Other Resources](#9-other-resources)

## 1. Description

The Blob Store is a generic datastore that can be used for any specific data model. In the current Teranode implementation, it is used to store transactions (extended tx) and subtrees.

The Blob Store provides a set of methods to interact with the TX and Subtree storage implementations:

### Store Interface Methods

- **Health**: `Health(ctx, checkLiveness bool) (int, string, error)` - Checks the health status of the blob store, returning HTTP status code, description, and any error.

- **Exists**: `Exists(ctx, key, fileType, opts...) (bool, error)` - Determines if a given key exists in the store.

- **Get**: `Get(ctx, key, fileType, opts...) ([]byte, error)` - Retrieves the blob data associated with a given key.

- **GetIoReader**: `GetIoReader(ctx, key, fileType, opts...) (io.ReadCloser, error)` - Retrieves an `io.ReadCloser` for the blob associated with a given key, useful for streaming large data.

- **Set**: `Set(ctx, key, fileType, value, opts...) error` - Stores a key-value pair in the store.

- **SetFromReader**: `SetFromReader(ctx, key, fileType, reader, opts...) error` - Stores a key-value pair in the store from an `io.ReadCloser`, useful for streaming large data.

- **SetDAH**: `SetDAH(ctx, key, fileType, dah, opts...) error` - Sets a Delete-At-Height value for a given key for automatic blockchain-based expiration.

- **GetDAH**: `GetDAH(ctx, key, fileType, opts...) (uint32, error)` - Retrieves the Delete-At-Height value for a given key.

- **Del**: `Del(ctx, key, fileType, opts...) error` - Deletes a key and its associated value from the store.

- **Close**: `Close(ctx) error` - Closes the Blob Store connection and releases any associated resources.

- **SetCurrentBlockHeight**: `SetCurrentBlockHeight(height uint32)` - Sets the current block height for the store, used for DAH functionality.

11. **SetCurrentBlockHeight**: `SetCurrentBlockHeight(height)`
    - **Purpose**: Sets the current block height for the store, used by the DAH (Delete-At-Height) mechanism.

## 2. Architecture

The Blob Store is a store interface, with implementations for Tx Store and Subtree Store.

![Blob_Store_Component_Context_Diagram.png](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2FBlob_Store_Component_Context_Diagram.png)

The Blob Store implementations for Tx Store and Subtree Store are injected into the various services that require them. They are initialized in `daemon/daemon_stores.go` and passed into the services as dependencies. See example below:

```go
// GetTxStore returns the main transaction store instance. If the store hasn't been initialized yet,
// it creates a new one using the configured URL from settings.
func (d *Stores) GetTxStore(logger ulogger.Logger, appSettings *settings.Settings) (blob.Store, error) {
    if d.mainTxStore != nil {
        return d.mainTxStore, nil
    }

    txStoreURL := appSettings.Block.TxStore
    if txStoreURL == nil {
        return nil, errors.NewConfigurationError("txstore config not found")
    }

    var err error
    hashPrefix := 2
    if txStoreURL.Query().Get("hashPrefix") != "" {
        hashPrefix, err = strconv.Atoi(txStoreURL.Query().Get("hashPrefix"))
        if err != nil {
            return nil, errors.NewConfigurationError("txstore hashPrefix config error", err)
        }
    }

    d.mainTxStore, err = blob.NewStore(logger, txStoreURL, options.WithHashPrefix(hashPrefix))
    if err != nil {
        return nil, errors.NewServiceError("could not create tx store", err)
    }

    return d.mainTxStore, nil
}

// GetSubtreeStore returns the main subtree store instance. If the store hasn't been initialized yet,
// it creates a new one using the URL from settings.
func (d *Stores) GetSubtreeStore(ctx context.Context, logger ulogger.Logger, appSettings *settings.Settings) (blob.Store, error) {
    if d.mainSubtreeStore != nil {
        return d.mainSubtreeStore, nil
    }

    var err error
    subtreeStoreURL := appSettings.SubtreeValidation.SubtreeStore

    if subtreeStoreURL == nil {
        return nil, errors.NewConfigurationError("subtreestore config not found")
    }

    hashPrefix := 2
    if subtreeStoreURL.Query().Get("hashPrefix") != "" {
        hashPrefix, err = strconv.Atoi(subtreeStoreURL.Query().Get("hashPrefix"))
        if err != nil {
            return nil, errors.NewConfigurationError("subtreestore hashPrefix config error", err)
        }
    }

    blockchainClient, err := d.GetBlockchainClient(ctx, logger, appSettings, "subtree")
    if err != nil {
        return nil, errors.NewServiceError("could not create blockchain client for subtree store", err)
    }

    ch, err := getBlockHeightTrackerCh(ctx, logger, blockchainClient)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, errors.NewServiceError("could not create block height tracker channel", err)
    }

    d.mainSubtreeStore, err = blob.NewStore(logger, subtreeStoreURL,
        options.WithHashPrefix(hashPrefix),
        options.WithBlockHeightCh(ch))
    if err != nil {
        return nil, errors.NewServiceError("could not create subtree store", err)
    }

    return d.mainSubtreeStore, nil
}
```

The following diagram provides a deeper level of detail into the Blob Store's internal components and their interactions:

![blob_store_detailed_component.svg](../services/img/plantuml/blobserver/blob_store_detailed_component.svg)

## 3. Technology

### 3.1 Overview

Key technologies involved:

1. **Go Programming Language (Golang)**:

    - A statically typed, compiled language known for its simplicity and efficiency, especially in concurrent operations and networked services.
    - The primary language used for implementing the service's logic.

### 3.2 Store Options

The Blob Server supports various backends, each suited to different storage requirements and environments.

- **Batcher**: Provides batch processing capabilities for storage operations.

- **File**: Utilizes the local file system for storage.

- **HTTP**: Implements an HTTP client for interacting with a remote blob storage server.

- **Local DAH**: Provides local Delete-At-Height (DAH) functionality for managing blockchain-based data expiration.

- **Memory**: In-memory storage for temporary and fast data access.

- **Null**: A no-operation store for testing or disabling storage features.

- **Amazon S3**: Integration with Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) for cloud storage. [Amazon S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/)

Each store option is implemented in its respective subdirectory within the `stores/blob/` directory.

The system also includes a main server implementation (`server.go`) that provides an HTTP interface for blob storage operations.

Options for configuring these stores are managed through the `options` package.

### 3.3 Concurrent Access Patterns

The Blob Server includes a `ConcurrentBlob` implementation that provides thread-safe access to blob storage operations with optimized concurrent access patterns. This feature is particularly important in high-concurrency environments where the same blob might be requested multiple times simultaneously.

#### Key Features

- **Double-Checked Locking Pattern**: Ensures that only one fetch operation occurs at a time for each unique key, while allowing concurrent operations on different keys
- **Generic Type Support**: Parametrized by a key type K that must satisfy `chainhash.Hash` constraints for type-safe handling
- **Duplicate Operation Prevention**: Avoids duplicate network or disk operations when multiple goroutines request the same blob simultaneously
- **Efficient Resource Usage**: Other goroutines wait for completion rather than duplicating work

#### Usage Pattern

```go
// Create a concurrent blob instance
concurrentBlob := blob.NewConcurrentBlob[chainhash.Hash](blobStore, options...)

// Get a blob with automatic fetching if not present
reader, err := concurrentBlob.Get(ctx, key, fileType, func() (io.ReadCloser, error) {
    // This function is called only if the blob doesn't exist
    return fetchBlobFromSource(key)
})
```

The `ConcurrentBlob` wrapper is particularly useful for services that need to fetch the same data concurrently, such as block validation or transaction processing services.

### 3.4 HTTP REST API Server

The Blob Store includes a comprehensive HTTP REST API server implementation (`HTTPBlobServer`) that provides full HTTP access to blob storage operations. This server implements the standard `http.Handler` interface and can be easily integrated into existing HTTP server infrastructure.

#### Supported HTTP Endpoints

- **GET /health**: Health check endpoint returning server status
- **HEAD /blob/{key}.{fileType}**: Check if a blob exists without retrieving content
- **GET /blob/{key}.{fileType}**: Retrieve blob by key with optional Range header support for partial content
- **POST /blob/{key}.{fileType}**: Store new blob data with streaming support
- **PATCH /blob/{key}.{fileType}**: Update blob's Delete-At-Height value via `dah` query parameter
- **DELETE /blob/{key}.{fileType}**: Delete blob by key

#### Usage Example

```go
// Create HTTP blob server
httpServer := blob.NewHTTPBlobServer(blobStore, logger)

// Start HTTP server
http.Handle("/blob/", http.StripPrefix("/blob", httpServer))
log.Fatal(http.ListenAndServe(":8080", nil))
```

The HTTP server is particularly useful for external integrations, debugging, and providing web-based access to blob storage functionality.

## 4. Data Model

- [Subtree Data Model](../datamodel/subtree_data_model.md): Contain lists of transaction IDs and their Merkle root.

- [Extended Transaction Data Model](../datamodel/transaction_data_model.md): Include additional metadata to facilitate processing.

## 5. Use Cases

### 5.1. Asset Server (HTTP): Get Transactions

![asset_server_http_get_transaction.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fassetserver%2Fasset_server_http_get_transaction.svg)

### 5.2. Asset Server (HTTP): Get Subtrees

![asset_server_http_get_subtree.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fassetserver%2Fasset_server_http_get_subtree.svg)

### 5.3. Block Assembly

New Subtree and block mining scenarios:

![blob_server_block_assembly.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fblobserver%2Fblob_server_block_assembly.svg)

Reorganizing subtrees:

![asset_server_grpc_get_subtree.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fassetserver%2Fasset_server_grpc_get_subtree.svg)

### 5.4. Block Validation

Service:

![blob_server_block_validation.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fblobserver%2Fblob_server_block_validation.svg)

gRPC endpoints:

![blob_server_block_validation_addendum.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fblobserver%2Fblob_server_block_validation_addendum.svg)

### 5.5 Propagation: TXStore Set()

![txStore_propagation_set.svg](..%2Fservices%2Fimg%2Fplantuml%2Fassetserver%2FtxStore_propagation_set.svg)

## 6. Directory Structure and Main Files

```text
./stores/blob/
├── Interface.go                # Interface definitions for the blob store.
├── batcher                     # Batching functionality for efficient processing.
│   └── batcher.go              # Main batcher functionality.
├── concurrent_blob.go          # Concurrent blob access implementation.
├── concurrent_blob_test.go     # Test cases for concurrent blob access.
├── factory.go                  # Factory methods for creating store instances.
├── file                        # File system based implementations.
│   ├── file.go                 # File system handling.
│   └── file_test.go            # Test cases for file system functions.
├── http                        # HTTP client implementation for remote blob storage.
│   └── http.go                 # HTTP specific functionality.
├── localdah                    # Local Delete-At-Height functionality.
│   ├── localDAH.go             # Local DAH implementation.
│   └── localDAH_test.go        # Test cases for local DAH.
├── logger                      # Logging wrapper for blob store operations.
├── memory                      # In-memory implementation.
│   └── memory.go               # In-memory data handling.
├── mock.go                     # Mock implementation for testing.
├── null                        # Null implementation (no-op).
│   └── null.go                 # Null pattern implementation.
├── options                     # Options and configurations.
│   ├── Options.go              # General options for the project.
│   └── Options_test.go         # Test cases for options.
├── s3                          # Amazon S3 cloud storage implementation.
│   └── s3.go                   # S3 specific functionality.
├── server.go                   # HTTP server implementation for blob storage.
└── server_test.go              # Test cases for the server implementation.
```

## 7. Locally Running the store

The Blob Store cannot be run independently. It is instantiated as part of the main.go initialization and directly used by the services that require it.

## 8. Configuration Options

For comprehensive configuration documentation including all settings, defaults, and interactions, see the [ublob Store Settings Reference](../../references/settings/stores/blob_settings.md).

## 9. Other Resources

[Blob Server Reference](../../references/stores/blob_reference.md)
